# Teaching Week 2

_September 29, 2010_

Today, I tried opening by addressing some of the problems from last week. The
computers were very slow. I submitted an HISD trouble ticket to try to update
the video drivers. But the school does not have an IT person as of last week,
and the computers in the lab are never used because there are no computer
classes being taught. There is no projector in there either.

I also tried talking about the importance and pervasive nature of computers,
and how learning to make a game can help you across all areas of computers,
connecting the students to think about college and future careers. The behavior
was a little out of control today, and I have trouble talking over them. I
didn’t have their focus, so I went straight to the computer.

I tried giving a formal explanation of the Fun2D program. Again, I felt like I
didn’t have their attention. I started demonstrating the game, and it actually
ran too fast. Ironic, considering that it ran too slow on the lab computers.

After retrieving a projector for the lab, we walked the students to the lab and
had them setup like last week. Three students were without computers, though 20
extra computers were stored in the back, without any power cables. I made sure
to arrange for more computers for next week. After struggling to get the
projector working, I could not get a single student to watch the projector as I
tried walking them through how to create their first game. Later, my manager
told me that order them to turn off their monitors would be a good solution to
that. So I just pressed, and drew a snowy mountain range for my demo game, and
got it to display with a small amount of code that I was trying to explain to
one of the students. More and more students were noticing this and were asking
for me to help catch them up. One-on-one time with each student seemed to help.

So what started as a lesson plan to get them to draw simple shapes and text on
the screen, ended with a simple goal to draw a background image and get it to
draw to the screen using code. The students don’t type very well, so I was
forced to type the code for them, being rushed from the backlog of students
that I had to tend to before the end of the class.

I met with my manager and team leader, and they suggested that I created simple
instructions on a paper handout for each student. And start with more written
material to ensure they learn an important objective item before going to the
lab. I agreed, so I will be preparing this for next week. I hope to get them to
draw a background, player, and get them on the screen with some code.
