# Teaching Week 0

_September 15, 2010_

Today was the Citizen Schools apprenticeship fair at Jane Long Middle School. I
pitched my apprenticeship to the students, 6th graders. Some were pretty
excited with the idea, and I tried keeping their interest by asking them what
their favorite games are (I found that it was easy to keep the students focused
by leading them with questions, and keeping them stimulated and participating.)
I couldn’t explain much about programming in a 10 minute session, but I left
them with the idea that they will be giving the computer a set of instructions
in order to create their game. I told them that art would be involved, and that
we would be making very simple games that they can take home and show their
family and friends. I was pleasantly surprised that they were familiar with old
2D games like mario, pacman, and galaxian.

Some of them seemed very interested even after I explained that it is going to
be hard. Others became disinterested and wanted to do “game testing” instead. I
tried encouraging the ones who said they didn’t like math, and that making
games would be a fun way to learn it. I made sure that they knew it that it
will not be easy, but I also told them that I was confident they could do it if
they worked because most things worth doing are difficult. I had 6 different
10-minute sessions, and each one was a little different, ranging in content and
crowd behavior. I got questions about whether they would be able to make
violent games, and whether they can use Twilight characters in their game, or
if they can make a renaissance fantasy game. And one smart girl asked if it was
similar to creating a website. Another smart student asked how we would be
programming hardware. After I picked my jaw up from the floor, I waved my hands
around as I explained that we would be staying on the software layer, above
hardware which we wouldn’t have to deal with.

Also, I wish I had stressed the importance of being able to program a computer,
and how pervasive it is in society, and how beneficial it will be. I’ll start
class next week with that.

I will be using Love2D as my teaching tool, instead of AgentSheets which is
used in the prewritten curriculum that was given to me. The curriculum is a set
of lesson plans for making Frogger in AgentSheets. AgentSheets presents a
pictoral programming environment, which I’m sure is easier than code. They
teach the students to implement Frogger by identifying the objects in the game,
and the operations that take place between them (Absorb, Generate, Collide,
Transport). I tried reading a paper about the success of this renowned program
that was cited on their website, but I did not have the required ACM
subscription. I wish knowledge was free.

I am required to use this curriculum for AgentSheets, but by greed or ambition,
I think I might do better by getting them excited about writing actual code.
But I’m all speculation at this point. AgentSheets follows the philosophy of
high-level design patterns, and I wish to test the philosophy of giving them a
more raw perspective on what computers are about. So I’m developing an editor
for Love2D that will simplify the process of coding by providing an easy way to
import their art, and to instantly see what they’re coding. I’ve also created a
library of simplified functions that will make coding easier. I want it to be
as simple as possible without taking away the basic coding constructs-
functions, condition branches, simple variables, arrays, and loops.

I recognize that I will be taking a risk by straying from the (proven?)
curriculum. I am spending a lot of time developing the editor that the students
will be using, rather than developing formal lesson plans. My plan is to have
the students writing simple code in the first class which will display an image
or text in different colors. This immediate feedback will be good for them. I
will then proceed with problems that motivate the different constructs, such as
variables, and if statements, and then later to arrays and loops. I plan to
write the lesson plans one week at a time, but will still have a general idea
of the milestones. Trying to keep it freeform and adaptable. Each day I’ll be
learning about what works and what doesn’t.
