# Teaching Week 9

_November 21, 2010_

Was not satisfied with this week’s lesson. Even my good students weren’t
focusing that well.

I started by taping 4 sheets of large paper over the whiteboard. There is no
room on the whiteboard to write, so I have to do tape space over it.

My plan was to go through each line of code that the students should have
written by then. The start function was still not mastered, but the students
were able to call out most of it.

Meanwhile, the girls decided to pay attention today because I managed to
guilt-trip them last week. I told them I couldn’t help them because they
weren’t paying attention. Intentions were good, but it was too late for them.
Regardless, they wrote down everything I put on the board. I tried writing in
the margins a brief description of each section of code in a different color.
Unfortunately, they were in panick mode and just wanted a working game. THe
only guarantee for them would be to just write down exactly what they needed to
get it done.

I tried getting the students to keep telling me what would come next in their
code, trying to get them to recall what it was that they were doing, instead of
just writing it and forgetting it. I soon realized that only 2 students were
answering my questions. The others were fiddling with their jackets and
pencils. I don’t blame them. My voice was being silenced by the background of
chatter from the back of the room.

As soon as all the code was written on the board. I tried to review every part
of it, but they were growing impatient. We finally headed to the lab, and I
told them they had 40 minutes to finish their game. I brought the large sheets
of paper with every line of code they needed.

I tried helping the girls, but they were so far behind, I gave up.

Only one of my students finished, and he was asking me to teach him how to add
multiple missiles using the shortcut I used in my game. I wanted to teach him
what arrays were and how to loop through them, but he already had a working
game. I felt too guilty for not getting the other students to finish their game
as well.
