# Teaching Week 3

_October 6, 2010_

There was political drama over the tool that I developed to teach the students,
Fun2D. The organization had already paid for 15 licenses of AgentSheets, and
were expecting to have me be one of 3 test pilots to test their program and
curriculum. We were two weeks into the program before the demand was made, but
my team leader and manager pleaded my case and are allowing me to use this
program, so long as they “Learn the programming language, and understand the
process of the game.” I promised that it would be these requirements.

I took a different approach this week, and it went well. They spent the last
weeks in freeform structure because frankly I couldn’t keep their focus in the
past week. They mainly spent time drawing images for their game by using the
Fun2D tool, while I went from desk to desk for one-on-one tutoring based on
their interest.

Due to the recommendations from my manager last week, I created a 16 page
worksheet for the students, hoping it would hold their focus and make it easier
to teach concepts. Some complained that they wouldn’t be going to the computer
lab, but rather sitting at a desk filling out a worksheet. I told them that
they can draw pictures all day, but it’s not going to do anything unless you
write the code to make the art do stuff. This drew some nods and yeahs.

The content of the worksheet taught the students how to write code for
functions, scenes, and images. In addition to the worksheet, they were also
handed a paper with numbered lines, where they would write their code. Each
activity on the worksheet would require them to add lines of code to their
page. This format worked well – give them simple facts to learn, with fill in
the blanks for participation, and activities to write code based on these
facts, with constant repetition and review to ensure that they understand.

I think it’s worth mentioning, that If they weren’t on writing code on their
paper, I think they would be frustrated with typing (as they were in the
previous weeks in the lab) and the errors from missing paretheses, etc.

The students who did the best were the students who were at the very front of
the classroom. I did a lot of running around the room to make sure everyone was
caught up, especially on the code page. People toward the back tended to miss
what I was saying, and weren’t writing their code down. The trouble-makers were
on one side of the classroom, and I couldn’t get them to keep up, so rather
than holding the other students back, I made the decision to press with the
students who were paying attention. I had an extra behavior manager help out
today, and he kept them occupied. One student even recommended me to separate
them, which might be a good idea. But I wouldn’t want them distracting the
others students. One of the students who was sitting next to the trouble-makers
asked me why I wasn’t teaching them. I walked over and explained that I can’t
talk very loud, and everyone at that table is talking over me, so I couldn’t do
anything about it. I wish I told him to sit closer to the front if he wants to
keep up. I made a quick effort to catch him up, but I still don’t know how I’m
going to catch up the students who fall behind when I’m already under pressure
to get the behaving students to make a functioning game.

On a personal note, I was very pleased with the engagement of the students.
They had already learned their X and Y axes from math class, so the screen
coordinates was easy to teach. The hardest part was teaching them how to load
their images; it’s a bit confusing honestly.

Next week, I need to focus on getting them to move pictures around the screen
using the arrow keys. They’ll have to learn Conditions, Keys, and Position
Incrementing. I will follow the same format, and hopefully get them to computer
lab. When they type out their code, we will run into a whole new class of
problems (typos, variable name constraints, case-sensitivity, misplaced
parentheses). Misplaced parentheses was a problem when they were writing their
code down today.
